# 10. Nipping Addictions at Birth

## 10.

## Nipping Addictions at Birth

Today, the average schoolchild aged between eight and eighteen years spends a third of her life sleeping, a third at school, and a third engrossed in new media, from smartphones and tablets to TVs and laptops. She spends more time communicating through screens than she does with other people directly, face-to-face. Since the turn of the new millennium, the rate of non-screen playtime fell 20 percent, while the rate of screen playtime increased by a similar amount. These stats aren’t inherently bad—the world changes constantly—but in 2012 six researchers showed that they happen to be taking a human toll.

—

In the summer of 2012, fifty-one children visited a summer camp just outside Los Angeles. The children were typical Southern Californian public school kids: an equal mix of boys and girls aged eleven or twelve years from a variety of ethnic and socioeconomic backgrounds. All of them had access to a computer at home, and roughly half owned a phone. They spent an hour texting friends each day, about two and a half hours watching TV, and just over an hour playing computer games.

For this one week, the children would leave their phones and TVs and gaming consoles at home. Instead, they hiked and learned to use compasses and to shoot bows and arrows. They learned how to cook over a campfire and how to tell an edible plant from a poisonous plant. They weren’t explicitly taught to look each other in the eyes, face-to-face, but in the absence of new media, that’s exactly what happened. Instead of reading “LOL” and staring at smiley-face emojis, they actually laughed and smiled. Or didn’t laugh and smile if they were sad or angry.

On Monday morning, when the kids arrived at the camp, they took a short test called the DANVA2, which stands for the Diagnostic Analysis of Nonverbal Behavior. It’s a fun test—one of those tests that goes viral on Facebook—because all you have to do is interpret the emotional states of a bunch of strangers. For half the test you look at their faces in photos, and for the other half you listen to them read a sentence aloud. Then you decide whether they’re happy or sad or angry or fearful. That may sound trivial, but it isn’t. Some of the faces and voices are easy to read—these are labeled “high-intensity”—but many of them are subtle. Like deciding whether the Mona Lisa is smiling inside, or whether she’s just bored or unhappy. I tried the test and got some of the answers wrong. One guy sounded mildly depressed, but the test told me he was actually mildly afraid. The summer camp kids had the same experience. They made an average of fourteen errors across the forty-eight-item test.

Four days of camping and hiking later, the kids were ready to file onto buses to return home. Before they did, the researchers administered the DANVA2 again. They reasoned that a week of face-to-face interaction without distraction from gadgets might make the kids more sensitive to emotional cues. There’s good reason to believe practice makes perfect when it comes to reading emotional cues. Children who are raised in isolation—like the famed Wild Boy of Aveyron who was raised by wolves in a forest in France till he was nine years old—never learn to read emotional cues. And people who are forced into isolation struggle to interact with others when they emerge, sometimes for the rest of their lives. Children who spend time together also learn to read emotional cues through repeated feedback: you may think your playmate is holding out a toy because he wants to share it with you, but if you look at his face you’ll see he’s about to use the toy as a weapon.

Reading emotions is a finely tuned skill that atrophies with disuse and improves with practice, and that’s what the researchers found at the summer camp. The kids did much better the second time they took the DANVA2. They were never told the answers to the test after taking it the first time, but their error rate dropped by 33 percent. The researchers also asked a control group of kids from the same school to take the test twice. These kids didn’t attend the camp, so they took the test on a Monday morning and a Friday afternoon just as the camp kids did. Their error rate dropped a bit, too—by 20 percent—presumably because there’s some benefit to taking the same test twice, but this rate of improvement was much less impressive than the rate shown by the wilderness campers.

Now, there’s a lot that separates a week in the city from a week at camp. Apart from access to gadgets and time spent face-to-face with friends, there are plenty of other differences that may have explained the kids’ different rates of improvement on the DANVA2. Is it that spending time in nature improves mental functioning? Or that spending time with your peers makes you smarter? Or that staying away from gadgets makes all the difference? It’s impossible to be sure, but that doesn’t change the prescription: kids do better at a task that drives the quality of their social interactions when they spend more time with other kids in a natural environment than they do when spending a third of their lives glued to glowing screens.

—

Children are especially vulnerable to addiction, because they lack the self-control that prevents many adults from developing addictive habits. Regulated societies respond by refusing to sell alcohol and cigarettes to children—but very few societies regulate behavioral addictions. Kids can still play with interactive tech for hours at a time, and they can still play video games as long as their parents will allow. (Korea and China have flirted with so-called Cinderella laws, which prohibit children from playing games between midnight and six in the morning.)

Why shouldn’t kids be allowed to play with interactive tech for hours at a time? And why, as I mentioned in the book’s prologue, do so many tech experts prohibit their children from using the very devices they design and promote in public? The truth is that we won’t know how children will respond to tech overuse for some years still. The first generation of native iPhone users is only eight or nine years old, and the first generation of native iPad users is six or seven. They haven’t reached their teens, so there’s no way to know just how different they are from their peers who are just a couple of years older. But we do know what to look for. Tech subsumes some very basic mental activities that were once universal. Kids of the 1990s and earlier stored dozens of phone numbers in their heads; they interacted with each other rather than with devices; and they made their own fun instead of extracting manufactured fun from ninety-nine cent apps.

A couple of years ago, I became interested in what we call *hardship inoculation*. This is the idea that struggling with a mental puzzle—trying to remember a phone number or deciding what to do on a long Sunday afternoon—inoculates you against future mental hardships just as vaccinations inoculate you against illness. Reading a book, for example, is harder than watching the TV. (David Denby, a film critic at the *New Yorker*, recently wrote that kids are abandoning books as they age. “Books smell like old people,” he overheard one teenager say.) There is good early evidence to support the idea that small doses of mental hardship are good for us. Young adults do much better on tricky mental puzzles when they’ve solved difficult (rather than easy) ones earlier. Adolescent athletes also thrive on challenges: we’ve found, for example, that college basketball teams do better when their preseason schedules are more demanding. These mild initial struggles are critical. Depriving our kids of them by handing them a device that makes everything easier is dangerous—we just don’t know how dangerous.

Relying too heavily on tech also leads to a phenomenon known as *digital amnesia.* In two surveys, thousands of U.S. and European adults struggled to remember a raft of important phone numbers. They struggled to recall their kids’ cell phone numbers and the central phone number at their workplace. In other questions, 91 percent of respondents described their phones as “extensions of their brains.” The majority said they would search online for answers to questions before trying to generate the answer from memory, and 70 percent said they would feel sadness or panic if they lost their smartphone devices even briefly. Most said there was information on their smartphones that wasn’t stored in their heads or anywhere else.

The M.I.T. psychologist Sherry Turkle has also argued that technology turns children into poor communicators. Take the case of texting, which many children (and adults) prefer to phone calls. Texting allows you to modulate your message more precisely than does speech. If you usually reply “haha” to a joke, you can write “hahaha” to signal that this one is particularly funny—or “HAHAHAHA” if the joke is uproarious. If you’re angry, you can reply with the dismissive “k,” and if you’re furious you can choose not to respond at all. To shout, use a single “!,” and to exclaim loudly, use “!!” or even “!!!!” There’s a mathematical precision to these signals—you can count the number of “ha”s or “!”s—so texting is ideal for the risk-averse communicator who worries about miscommunicating. The significant downside is that nothing is spontaneous and very little is ambiguous when you follow the rules of text-speak. There are no non-verbal cues; no pauses and lilts and unplanned giggles or scoffs to punctuate your partner’s message. Without these cues, children can’t learn to communicate face-to-face.

Turkle illustrates the limitations of cell phone communication by recounting an observation that comedian Louis C.K. shared with Conan O’Brien in 2013. He explained that he was not raising children; he was raising the grown-ups they’re going to be. Phones, he said, are “toxic, especially for kids.”

They don’t look at people when they talk to them. And they don’t build the empathy. You know, kids are mean. And it’s because they’re trying it out. They look at a kid and they go, “You’re fat.” And they see the kid’s face scrunch up and they go, “Ooh, that doesn’t feel good to make a person do that” . . . but when they write, “You’re fat,” then they just go, “Mmm, that was fun. I like that.”

For Louis C.K., face-to-face communication is essential, because it’s the only way for kids to appreciate how their words affect other people.

—

As I write this, two weeks ago my wife gave birth to our first child. Sam Alter was born into a world of screens. The screen on his baby monitor carries our voices and faces to his room. The screen on my iPad introduces him to his grandparents and uncle and cousins around the world. The TV in our living room delivers moving pictures and sounds as we soothe him to sleep. In time he’ll learn to use the iPad and the TV himself. Then he’ll learn to use computers and smartphones, and whichever soon-to-be-invented devices come to define his generation as computers and smartphones define ours. In many respects these screens will enrich his childhood: he’ll watch videos, play games, and interact with people in ways his ancestors considered science fiction. But there’s a good chance they’ll also detract from his childhood. Two-dimensional screen worlds are poorer versions of the real thing. Social interactions are watered down, and there’s more room for spoon-feeding and less room for imagination and exploration. As Andy Doan told me, the time we spend with screens as children goes on to influence how we interact with the world for the rest of our lives. It’s easier to strike the right balance earlier than to correct unhealthy patterns later.

One subgenre of YouTube videos shows how infants respond to screen time: they don’t know how to use magazines. One of these videos has over five million views. It shows a one-year-old girl who swipes an iPad screen like a pro. She navigates from one screen to the next and squeals happily as the device responds to her will. The swiping gesture that Apple introduced with its first iPhone in 2007 is as natural to her as breathing or eating. But when she sits in front of a magazine, she continues to swipe, becoming frustrated when the inert photos before her refuse to resolve into new ones. She is among the first humans to understand the world this way—to believe that she has limitless command over the visual environment, and the ability to overcome the staleness of any experience by welcoming its replacement with a dismissive swipe. The video is aptly titled, “A magazine is an iPad that does not work,” and the comments below the video ask questions like, “Can you explain why you’d give a one-year-old an iPad?”

iPads make the job of parenting much easier. They provide renewable entertainment to kids who like watching videos or playing games, so they’re a miracle for overworked and under-rested parents. But they also set dangerous precedents that are difficult for kids to shake as they mature. reSTART’s Hilarie Cash has firm views on the subject. She isn’t puritanical, but she’s seen the effects of overexposure firsthand. “Kids shouldn’t be exposed to screens before the age of two,” she says. Their interactions, Cash argues, should be direct, social, firsthand, and concrete. Those first two years set the standard for how those kids will interact with the world when they’re three and four and seven and twelve years old, and so on. “They should be allowed to watch passive TV till they reach elementary school—around age seven—when they should be introduced to interactive media, like iPads and smartphones,” Cash says. She also suggests limiting screen time to two hours per day, even for teenagers. “It’s not easy,” she admits. “But it’s critical. Kids need sleep and physical activity, and family time, and time to use their imaginations.” Those things can’t happen when they’re lost in screenworlds.

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) agrees with Cash. “Television and other entertainment media should be avoided for infants and children under age 2,” the AAP advised in an online report. “A child’s brain develops rapidly during these first years, and young children learn best by interacting with people, not screens.” That may be true, but abstinence is a lot to demand when screens are everywhere. Even in 2006—four years before Apple introduced the first iPad—the Kaiser Foundation found that 43 percent of children under two watched TV daily, and 85 percent watched at least once a week. Sixty-one percent of children under two spent at least some time each day in front of a screen. In 2014, an organization called Zero to Three reported that 38 percent of children under two years of age had used a mobile device (compared to 10 percent in 2012). By age four, 80 percent of children had used a mobile device.

Zero to Three takes a softer approach than the AAP, acknowledging that some screen time is all but inevitable. Rather than banning screens outright, Zero to Three recommends specific *kinds* of screen time. Its report begins:

A robust body of research shows that the most important factor in a child’s healthy development is a positive parent-child relationship, characterized by warm, loving interactions in which parents and other caregivers sensitively respond to their child’s cues and provide age-appropriate activities that nurture curiosity and learning.

The AAP obviously agrees: its statement on infant media consumption ends with the words “young children learn best by interacting with people, not screens.” The difference between them is that Zero to Three acknowledges that children can develop healthy interactions with screens, as long as parents are involved as well. Instead of banning screens, it lists three major qualities of healthy screen time.

First, parents should encourage their children to connect what they see in the screen world to their experience of the real world. If an app asks children to sort wooden blocks by color, parents might ask those children to label the color of clothes as they sort the laundry together. If an app presents wooden blocks and balls, children should play with real wooden blocks and balls afterward. No experience should be confined to a virtual world that was designed to mimic reality. This screen-to-reality bridging is known as *transfer of learning*, and it improves learning for two reasons: it requires children to repeat what they’ve learned, and it encourages them to generalize what they’ve learned beyond a single situation. If a dog on the screen is the same as a dog on the street, the child learns that dogs can exist in many contexts.

Second, active engagement is better than passive viewing. An app that requires children to act, remember, decide, and communicate with their parents is better than a TV show that allows them to absorb content passively. Slower-paced shows, like *Sesame Street*, encourage participation and engagement, so they’re superior to faster-paced shows like *SpongeBob SquarePants* (which isn’t designed for children under five). In one study, four-year-olds who watched *SpongeBob* (rather than a slower-paced educational cartoon) for nine minutes struggled to remember new information and resist temptation afterward. Consequently, the TV should rarely be on in the background, and TV time should be separated from the rest of the day.

Third, screen time should always focus on the content of the app rather than the technology itself. Children who are watching a story unfold should explain what they think might happen next; to point to and identify the characters on the screen; and to move slowly enough through the process that they aren’t overwhelmed by navigating the technology. To the extent possible, a screen-based story should mimic the experience of a book.

Like younger children, adolescents tend to be vulnerable to addiction. reSTART uses the metaphors of dieting and environmental sustainability to describe when and how often older children should interact with screens. Cash told me that she preferred not to use the term “addiction,” which implies all the trappings of disease. Instead, the center adopts the language of the environmental movement. Its homepage declares that reSTART is a “Center for Digital Technology Sustainability,” and that it teaches people to live sustainable lifestyles. The center is a “retreat” rather than a treatment facility. “It’s impossible to avoid technology altogether, so our aim isn’t to teach our clients to go cold turkey,” Cash told me. “We teach people how to problem solve, which isn’t a traditional form of therapy.” Cash explained that problem solving was critical, because the treatment plan lasted only forty-five days. After that, the boys were on their own.

reSTART’s treatment plan has three phases. During the first phase, the patients aren’t allowed to use technology at all. They go through detox, which typically lasts around three weeks. “Some of the guys are very resistant, but others embrace the process,” Cash said. “We can usually tell by the end of the first phase who will benefit from the treatment, and most of them do.” For the remainder of the first phase—another three or four weeks—the boys continue to live at the center. They learn the basic life skills that many of them lack, like cooking an egg, cleaning a toilet, making their beds, and, most important, managing their emotions. (One of the boys told me that he had played several games of chess since joining reSTART, and they usually ended when he threw the loaded chess board in anger.) They also learn to exercise and to embrace nature, which is a big part of reSTART’s philosophy: if you’re going to strip away a major component of their lives, you have to replace it with something that engages them and allows them to escape technology. Cash’s cofounder, Cosette Rae, told me that her husband leads nature walks. reSTART is nestled in a large forest, but beyond that the boys also hike nearby Mount Rainier. They train at the center’s gym every day, and many of them become quite fit. Cash cited an independent study, which found that 78–85 percent of the boys improve over this initial phase.

During the second phase, the recovering patients move into halfway houses that are similar to the houses managed by Alcoholics Anonymous. There they learn to apply the skills they learned at reSTART. They apply for jobs or volunteer positions, or they take college classes. The houses run according to stringent rules, and the patients receive support from reSTART in exchange for showing up at the center for regular outpatient check-in appointments. I asked Cash whether the program had been successful, and she told me that it had, but that she couldn’t provide firm numbers. reSTART is small, and the nature of each boy’s problem is slightly different, so it’s difficult to measure relapse rates. A graduate student was in the process of working with Cash and Rae to implement a more rigorous measurement plan.

The third and final phase begins when former patients are ready to return to life without supervision. Many of them stay in Washington, near the center, which allows them to check in with the center every few weeks or months. Since they come from all over the country, and occasionally from outside the United States, they’re also less likely to be tempted by old habits if they avoid the people and places that characterized their former addictions. (Remember the Vietnam vets who escaped their heroin addictions when they returned home from Vietnam.) Isaac Vaisberg discovered this the hard way when he returned home after his first visit to reSTART, and couldn’t resist playing World of Warcraft. He decided to stay nearby after leaving the center for the second time, and he still lives a short drive from reSTART.

Most teens don’t need to spend time at a facility like reSTART, but their parents still worry about how they interact with games and social media. Catherine Steiner-Adair, the psychologist I mentioned in chapter 1, interviewed thousands of teens and their parents to formulate a set of basic parenting principles. The teens, she explained, react badly to parents who are “Scary, Crazy, and Clueless.”

Scariness comes in the form of rigid, judgmental intensity. As parents become more worried, their claims naturally escalate. Statements like, “You’ll ruin your chances for college!” or “You will never bring that friend into this house again!” are guaranteed to alienate kids. Crazy parents overreact when their children come to them with problems. Steiner-Adair describes the case of a twelve-year-old girl who received a hurtful email from her friend. “She couldn’t talk about things like this because mom always had a way of ramping up the drama on everything. ‘She’ll say “that’s horrible!” and then get started, and then I not only have my friend to deal with but my crazy mother, too.’” It’s clear that the girl’s mother cares—she wants her daughter to feel better—but her instinctive, escalating response makes the problem worse. Clueless parents, on the other hand, are objects of pity. They either don’t understand the lives their children lead, or they find it overwhelming. “A clueless parent tries too hard” to befriend his kid, says Steiner-Adair. “He misses cues, often engaging over superficial things while failing to have meaningful conversations with his child about life values and about expectations and consequences.”

In contrast to the scary, crazy, and clueless parents are those who are “Approachable, Calm, Informed, and Realistic.” They understand that social media is a part of the real world. Sometimes their children will be upset, but overreaction makes the problem worse. These parents take the time to understand how their kids interact with social networking platforms. They ask non-judgmental questions of their kids and do their own research. They also impose boundaries, creating the sort of sustainable relationship with tech promoted at reSTART. The family engages in meaningful offline conversations, and at certain points in the day, everyone is offline together. Some of these ideals might seem obvious in the abstract, but they’re not always easy to achieve in the heat of the moment. Steiner-Adair’s mantra—Approachable, Calm, Informed, Realistic—is a useful rule of thumb when tensions rise.

—

So far, the U.S. government has chosen not to intervene on the relationship between children and behavioral addiction. There are no state-sponsored treatment clinics, perhaps because a relatively small percentage of addicted children need psychiatric help. The East Asian response to behavioral addiction, particularly in China and South Korea, has been far more adventurous than the U.S. response. In 2013, two Israeli filmmakers released a documentary called *Web Junkie.* For four months, Hilla Medalia and Shosh Shlam interviewed doctors, patients, and parents at an Internet addiction treatment facility in Beijing, China. Several years earlier, China had become the first country to declare Internet addiction a clinical disorder, labeling it “the number one public health threat” to its teenage population.

There are more than four hundred treatment centers in China, and, according to the country’s definition of Internet addiction, more than twenty-four million teen Internet addicts. Medalia and Shlam visit one of these centers, the Daxing Camp at Beijing Military Hospital, where they speak to the doyen of Internet addiction treatment in China, Professor Tao Ran. Ran is a soft-spoken psychiatrist who nonetheless inspires hatred in the center’s patients. Most of them have been tricked into visiting the center, where they spend three or four months as involuntary inpatients. They are forced to take a regimen of pills and to march in military formation, even as temperatures plunge in the midst of the harsh Beijing winter. Their parents, many of whom weep openly on camera, commit their sons (and occasionally daughters) because they feel they have no other option. Early in the documentary, Professor Ran explains the problem and his role as the center’s director:

Internet addiction is a cultural problem among Chinese teenagers. It has surpassed any other problem. As a psychiatrist, my job is to determine if this is a disease. We notice that these children have a bias towards virtual reality. They think the real world isn’t as good as the virtual world. Our research shows that addicts spend more than six hours a day online, not for the purpose of work or studying . . . some kids are so hooked on these games that they think going to the bathroom will affect their performance. So they wear a diaper. They are the same as heroin addicts—they crave and look forward to playing every day. That’s why they call it “electronic heroin.”

Later, Professor Ran implies that the problem is structural—that it isn’t a disease, and that it lies with society. He meets with a group of parents in a small, depressing room at the center. “One of the biggest problems among these kids is loneliness. Loneliness. Did you know they feel lonely?” he asks, speaking through an oddly echoing microphone that seems better suited to an arena. One parent replies, “I think it’s because they’re the only child in the family. And as parents we fail to make friends with our children. We only ask them to study hard. Their stress, their worries, their pain—we can’t see any of it. We care only about their studies.” Ran agrees. “So where do they look for their friends? The Internet. The virtual world has all sorts of grand audio and visual extravaganzas. Simulations that you won’t be able to find anywhere else. It becomes their best friend.” It’s clear that Professor Ran is ambivalent about the nature of Internet addiction. On the one hand he forces his patients to take psychotropic drugs, while on the other he implies that it isn’t a disease at all. When a society churns out millions of lonely, overworked children, why wouldn’t they turn to a boundless source of companionship and escape? That seems like a rational response to their disaffection. What brings about their undoing isn’t that they’re suffering from a disease, but rather that this digital world is so clearly superior to the real world they’re supposed to be inhabiting instead.

The teens themselves recognize this. They’re sophisticated in ways that escape the adults who grew up in a relatively primitive world. A group of teenage boys at the center discusses their addiction in a show of masculine one-upmanship. One says he played a video game for two months straight without quitting—the full extent of his summer vacation. Another chimes in and says he played for three hundred days, stopping briefly to eat, sleep, and use the bathroom. A third calls Professor Ran’s definition of addiction “bullshit.” Six hours a day seems normal to him. “If you check their definition of Internet addiction, 80 percent of Chinese must have it.” A fourth says, “Most of us don’t think we have Internet addictions. It’s not a real disease. It’s a social phenomenon.” The boys try to minimize the issue, but it’s clear that Internet addiction is a massive and growing problem in China.

—

The Western approach to behavioral addiction is just as scattered as Professor Ran’s approach. The *Diagnostic and Statistical Manual* now recognizes that gambling is a genuine behavioral addiction, and excessive Internet use was almost included in the DSM’s fifth edition, published in 2013. There are now more than two hundred academic papers on the topic of “Internet addiction,” so the American Psychiatric Association chose to mention it briefly in the manual’s appendix. Meanwhile, the DSM omitted other behavioral addictions, like exercise, smartphone, and work addiction, because they hadn’t yet attracted enough academic interest. That doesn’t make the experience of these addictions any less real, though, as I discovered when I spoke to behavioral addiction treatment experts. Even if the APA doesn’t consider them diseases or disorders, they still affect many thousands of lives. And perhaps they shouldn’t be considered clinical disorders at all—perhaps, like the millions of Chinese teens who treat loneliness by turning to the Internet, behavioral addicts are just responding to the constraints of the world they happen to inhabit.

In contrast to Professor Ran’s medical model, with its pills and psychiatric treatment sessions, reSTART primarily treats behavioral addiction as a structural issue: fix the structure of the affected person’s life and you’ll fix the problem. Therapy sessions form a small part of reSTART’s treatment plan—far smaller than, say, life training and coping skills. But that isn’t true of every U.S. facility. There is one hospital that treats behavioral addiction much as Western medicine treats substance addiction. The Bradford Regional Medical Center in Pennsylvania launched a ten-day inpatient treatment program for Internet addicts in 2013. Kimberly Young, the psychologist who founded the program, became interested in Internet addiction in the mid-1990s. “In 1994 or 1995, a friend of mine told me that her husband was spending between forty and sixty hours a week in AOL chat rooms,” Young said. “Internet access was expensive then, at $2.95 per hour, so his habit became a financial burden. I wondered whether people could develop an addiction to the Internet.” Young created the Internet Addiction Diagnostic Questionnaire, or IADQ, which she posted online. Like gambling and alcohol addiction questionnaires, the IADQ asked respondents to indicate whether eight statements applied to them. “Anyone who said at least five of the statements applied to them was ‘addicted,’” Young told me.

The next day dozens of people emailed her to say they were concerned. Many of them were scoring above five on the scale. Over the next four years, Young refined and validated the questionnaire, added twelve new items, and renamed it the Internet Addiction Test. (I included a sample of questions from the test in the first chapter of this book.)

Young began to treat a growing list of Internet addicts, fueled by two specific events, first in 2007 and then in 2010: the introduction of Apple’s iPhone and then its iPad. “My focus on Internet addiction exploded when the Internet went mobile,” Young told me. The addiction context was no longer limited to the home—now it was everywhere. By 2010, Young recognized the need for a dedicated treatment center. A long-out-of-date study in 2006 suggested that one in eight Americans was addicted to the Internet, but Young was convinced the number was much higher—and rising. She managed to secure sixteen beds at Bradford, which were set aside for an acute Internet addiction treatment center. She had spoken to Cash at reSTART, but Young preferred a different, more intensive approach. Instead of forty-five days, patients would stay at her facility for just ten days. “Most people don’t have time to spend longer than ten days with us,” she said. Many of them had seen other doctors who couldn’t help, so by the time they arrived at the hospital, they were desperate. They would undergo a rapid three-day detox, and then seven days of targeted cognitive-behavioral therapy. Young’s approach, known as Cognitive Behavioral Therapy for Internet Addiction, or CBT-IA, borrowed techniques that had been successful in treating other impulse disorders. Many of her patients don’t believe they have a problem, so she has to teach them to recognize that they are, in fact, addicts. Then she teaches them to reframe some of the harmful ideas that lead them to overuse the Internet—for example, the notion that they’re incapable of forming friendships offline. CBT-IA also encourages patients to re-engage with the offline world, which many of them have abandoned in favor of an online world that seems more forgiving.

In 2013, Young published a paper that described the effects of CBT-IA on 128 Internet addicts. She measured their progress immediately after twelve treatment sessions, and again one month, three months, and six months after treatment ended. The results were encouraging: immediately after treatment, Young’s patients were less preoccupied with the Internet, more capable of managing their time, and less likely to be experiencing harmful consequences from overuse. Six months later some of the treatment benefits had weakened, but the patterns were similar: CBT-IA seemed to be working, at least on this limited sample.

Programs like reSTART, Kimberly Young’s CBT-IA, and Professor Ran’s military academy are desperate attempts to deal with the most severe cases of behavioral addiction—and they’re restricted to Internet and gaming addiction. They aren’t perfect, but early evidence suggests that they yield small to moderate benefits. But what are we supposed to do with the remaining millions who aren’t ready or able to be inpatients—the millions who exercise too often, work longer hours than they should, and can’t help spending too much money online?

—

The answer is not to medicalize these moderate forms of addiction, but to alter the structure of how we live, both at a societal level and more narrowly, as we construct our day-to-day lives. It’s far easier to prevent people from developing addictions in the first place than it is to correct existing bad habits, so these changes should begin not with adults, but with young kids. Parents have always taught their children how to eat, when to sleep, and how to interact with other people, but parenting today is incomplete without lessons on how to interact with technology, and for how long each day.

Like Alcoholics Anonymous, many clinical programs promote abstinence: either you abstain from the addictive behavior, or you’ll never shake the addiction. Since abstinence isn’t a practical option for many modern behaviors, one alternative intervention takes a different approach. Where Alcoholics Anonymous suggests that addicts are helpless to overcome their addictions, *motivational interviewing* rests on the idea that people are more likely to stick to their goals if they’re both intrinsically motivated and feel empowered to succeed. Counselors begin by asking open-ended questions that encourage their clients to consider whether they want to change their addictive behaviors. What makes the approach radical is that clients are allowed to decide they don’t want to change their behavior at all.

Carrie Wilkens, cofounder and clinical director of the Center for Motivation and Change in New York City, explained the process. “The key to motivational interviewing is getting the costs and also the benefits of the addictive behavior on the table. We all know how terrible addiction is, but it also has benefits, and this tends to be the most meaningful part of the puzzle. Unpacking the behavior’s benefits is great because then you can understand the underlying needs that the behavior addresses.”

If, for example, a sixteen-year-old girl checks her Instagram account dozens of times a day, she might say that the benefit is that she feels connected to her friends. She posts pictures three or four times a day, and feels compelled to check whether her posts are attracting likes. The key to treating her addiction, then, is to make sure she feels connected through other means, and that she feels validated in the absence of those likes. A typical session with the girl might begin with something called a *readiness ruler*:

On a 0–10 scale, if 0 is not in the least bit ready to change your behavior, and 10 is as fired up as you can be, where are you?

The first question in the primary intervention probes the girl’s response to this question. Why is the number so high or low? This gives her a chance to express her willingness to change. If she gives a low response, she might say she doesn’t see any need to change her behavior; with a high response she might admit that her Instagram use is making her unhappy. From there, the clinician asks a series of open-ended questions:

What are the benefits of your Instagram use?

How would you like things to be different?

How does your Instagram use affect your well-being?

In what ways do you feel you could be doing better?

Counselors who practice motivational interviewing complete rigorous training seminars, but the general approach has plenty of benefits for parents and even adults who are trying to change their own behavior. It’s non-judgmental by nature, so addicts are less likely to be defensive. One script, for example, suggests the following opening:

I’m not here to preach to you or tell you what you “should” do; how would I know, it’s your life and not mine! I believe people know what’s best for them.

I don’t have an agenda, just a goal: to see if there is anything about the way you take care of your health that you would like to change, and if so, to see if I can help you get there.

How does that sound to you?

Counselors traditionally used the approach to treat substance abuse, but Wilkens says it works just as well for behaviors. At least one study confirmed her belief. It works because it motivates people to change, and gives them a sense of ownership over the process. They aren’t being cajoled or pressured to change by someone else; they’re choosing to change voluntarily. The approach also recognizes that different people are driven to overcome their addictions by different motives. For some people, addictions are a barrier to productivity; for others, a barrier to health; and for many, a barrier to fulfilling social relationships. Motivational interviewing uncovers that motive, and prompts the addicted person to change.

The technique’s effectiveness is explained by one of the dominant theories in motivation research: Self-Determination Theory (SDT). SDT explains that people are naturally proactive, especially when a behavior activates one of three central human needs: the need to feel in command of one’s life (autonomy); the need to form solid social bonds with family and friends (relatedness); and the need to feel effective when dealing with the external environment—learning new skills and overcoming challenges (competence). Though addictive behaviors are designed to soothe psychological discomfort, they also tend to frustrate one or more of these needs. A motivational interview makes that frustration clear: if you’re asked how your Instagram use affects your well-being, you’re going to see that it’s compromising your productivity, your relationships, or both. Far from rendering a person powerless in the face of her addiction, she’s left to feel both motivated and capable of changing for the better.

SDT emerged during the extravagant mid-1980s. Wall Street excess had reached a peak, and businesses believed that workers responded best to bigger paychecks and lavish perks. SDT suggested that these forms of compensation—known as extrinsic rewards—would fail to sustain motivation in the long run. What workers needed were intrinsic rewards: a job that made them feel effective and competent at a company they respected. Sometimes, extrinsic rewards were actually counterproductive, because they robbed workers of genuine intrinsic motivation. In one experiment, students enjoyed completing a series of puzzles—until researchers started paying them. As soon as they were paid, the students decided the puzzles weren’t much fun after all. When given the chance to continue working on the puzzles, they preferred other activities instead. SDT shows how important it is to design the right sort of environment, regardless of whether you want to promote or discourage a behavior. The key is to understand how different features of the environment—financial incentives and physical barriers, for example—shape motivation. A well-designed environment encourages good habits and healthy behavior; the wrong environment brings excess and—at the extremes—behavioral addiction.
