# 12. Gamification

## 12.

## Gamification

In late 2009, Swedish ad agency DDB Stockholm launched an online campaign for Volkswagen. Volkswagen was releasing a new eco-friendly car that was designed to make driving more fun, so DDB named the campaign The Fun Theory. “Fun can change people’s behavior for the better,” one executive explained, so perhaps a dose of fun would nudge drivers to try the new car. To generate buzz, DDB launched a series of clever experiments around Stockholm. Each one turned an otherwise mundane behavior into a game.

The first experiment took place at central Stockholm’s Odenplan metro station. Commuters had two options when exiting the station: to walk up a bank of twenty-four stairs, or to stand still on a narrow escalator. Surveillance footage showed that commuters were lazy by default, piling onto the crowded escalator rather than taking the empty staircase. The problem, DDB explained, is that stairs aren’t fun. So, late one evening, a team of workers converted the staircase into an electronic piano. Each stair became a piano key that played a loud tone in response to pressure. In the morning, commuters approached Odenplan’s exit as they usually did. At first, most took the escalator, but a few happened to take the stairs, unintentionally composing brief melodies as they left the station. Other commuters took note, and soon the stairs were more popular than the escalator. According to the video, “66 percent more people than normal chose the stairs over the escalator.” People flock when you turn a mundane experience into a game.

DDB released other experiments as the campaign gathered steam. At a popular park, an electronics expert created the “deepest bin in the world”—a trash can rigged to emit an echo implying that each piece of garbage plummeted before crashing far below. Other cans in the park attracted eighty pounds of trash each day; the deepest can attracted twice as much. Elsewhere, people were misusing recycling bins around the city, so DDB turned one bin into an arcade game. The game rewarded people who used the bin correctly with flashing lights and points that were recorded on a large, red display. An average of just two people used most nearby bins correctly each day; more than a hundred people used the arcade bin correctly each day.

The campaign was wildly successful. The videos attracted a combined total of more than thirty million YouTube hits, and plenty of online buzz. In 2010, DDB won the Cyber Grand Prix Lion at the world’s largest advertising festival—an enormous honor bestowed on the “world’s most celebrated viral campaigns.” Beyond industry plaudits, the campaign also changed how people behaved. For a brief time, the people of Stockholm were ever so slightly greener and healthier.

—

There are two ways to approach behavioral addictions: eliminate them or harness them. Elimination was the subject of the first eleven chapters of *Irresistible*, but—just as DDB did in Stockholm—it’s possible to channel the forces that drive harmful behavioral addiction for the good. The human tendencies that enslave us to smartphones, tablets, and video games also prepare us to do good: to eat better, exercise more, work smarter, behave more generously, and save more money. To be sure, there’s a fine line between behavioral addictions and helpful habits, and it’s important to keep that line in mind. The same Fitbit that fuels exercise addiction and eating disorders in some people pushes others to leave the couch behind during an hour of exercise. Addictive levers work by boosting motivation, so if your motivation is already high there’s a good chance those levers will compromise your well-being. If you’re a couch potato who hates to exercise, a dose of motivation can only help.

A broad survey of human behavior reveals plenty of room for improvement. Sixty percent of the world’s developed population is overweight or obese, including 67 percent of Americans, 66 percent of New Zealanders, 65 percent of Norwegians, and 61 percent of Brits, Germans, and Australians. Graduation rates in the United States are declining at every education level, from elementary school to four-year colleges. In response, the National Center for Public Policy and Higher Education expects personal income to fall over the next fifteen years. Americans save just 3 percent of their household income; Danes, Spaniards, Finns, Japanese, and Italians save even less. A paper in the prestigious medical journal the *Lancet* predicted that half of all babies born in the world’s developed countries after 2000 will live past one hundred years, which will outstrip their retirement savings by decades. Between 2013 and 2015, U.S. residents were among the one or two most generous nations in the world—but even so, Americans donated less than 2 percent of their income to charitable causes.

Almost everyone wants to change at least one behavior. For some, it’s spending too much and saving too little; for others, it’s wasting nine tenths of the work day checking emails; for others, still, eating too much or exercising too little. The obvious path to change is with effort, but willpower is limited. People are more likely to do the right thing, DDB showed, if the right thing happens to be fun. A computer programmer named John Breen had the same intuition when his son was struggling to learn SAT vocabulary in 2007. Breen designed a computer program that presented his son with randomly chosen words, and asked him to choose the best definition for each word among four alternatives. Breen also ran a website that educated people on world poverty, so he decided to combine the two. If the site attracted enough traffic, he could sell banner ad space to the highest bidder, and use the ad revenue to buy rice for the needy. And so FreeRice.com was born.

For every correct answer, Breen promised to donate ten grains of rice to a food charity. The site launched on October 7, 2007, and on its first day raised 830 grains of rice. FreeRice grew so fast that two months later Breen raised three hundred million grains in a single day. In 2009, he offered the platform to the United Nations World Food Programme, and in 2014 the site raised its hundred *billionth* grain—enough to feed five million adults for a day.

When American students are forced to learn thousands of words for the SATs, that’s a chore; yet that’s exactly what thousands of FreeRice users choose to do with their free time every day. The site succeeds because Breen managed to turn the chore into a game. All the elements are there: each correct answer earns ten points (depicted as grains of rice), which function like a game score. You can track how many correct answers you’ve delivered in a row, and the game reports your longest winning streak. Meanwhile, the words become more obscure as you rise through the game’s sixty levels—and decline in obscurity when you make a mistake. That way the game is always pitched perfectly between too easy and too difficult. Breen wisely added graphics as well, so you can track your progress visually: a small wooden bowl fills with rice until you reach one hundred grains, and then places the ball of one hundred grains beside the bowl as it begins filling again. Reach a thousand grains and an even bigger pile forms next to the bowl. Some users form groups that play together—the highest-scoring groups and individuals appear on a daily leaderboard—and you and your group members can stop and start whenever you like. FreeRice looks like a combination of learning and giving, but under the hood it’s driven by a gaming engine.

—

What DDB did for Volkswagen and Breen did for FreeRice is known as *gamification*: taking a non-game experience and turning it into a game. A computer programmer named Nick Pelling coined the term in 2002. Pelling realized that game mechanics could make any experience more compelling, but he struggled to commercialize the concept, which lay dormant until Google and several prominent venture capitalists revived it in 2010. The central theme of gamification is that the experience itself should be its own reward. Even if you aren’t motivated to donate to a food charity, or to learn new words, you should want to spend your time playing FreeRice. Over time, despite yourself, you’ll find that you *are* learning and donating rice.

Gamification researchers Kevin Werbach and Dan Hunter examined over one hundred examples of gamification, and identified three common elements: points, badges, and leaderboards. PBL, as the triad is known, first came together in airline frequent-flyer programs. United launched the first airline loyalty program in 1972, long before the advent of gamification, and other airlines soon introduced similar programs. With each flight or qualifying purchase, flyers earn *points* in the form of miles; when they earn enough points in a single year, they win *badges* in the form of status markers—silver, gold, platinum, and so on; and high-status members stand in different lines, board the plane first, and sometimes receive special treatment on the airplane—rewards that function as a conspicuous *leaderboard*.

Gamification is a powerful business tool, and harnessed appropriately it also drives happier, healthier, and wiser behavior. That philosophy drove Richard Talens and Brian Wang, who met in 2004 as freshmen at the University of Pennsylvania. Talens and Wang had two things in common: they both loved video games, and they were both fitness fanatics. “We kind of recognized each other because we saw each other eating broccoli and tuna in the cafeteria,” Talens recalled in an interview. “We had a very similar mentality to fitness because we both grew up very out of shape. We both grew up playing video games, and we both saw fitness as a game.” Talens and Wang became amateur body builders, and in 2011 they launched a gamified fitness website called Fitocracy. By 2013, Fitocracy had one million users; by 2015, two million.

Fitocracy rewards users with points after every workout—more points for harder workouts—and badges when those workouts reach certain milestones. Run a 10k, for example, and the site gives you the 5k badge, the 10k badge, and awards you 1313 points. When you go to the gym you’ll see two kinds of people: people who prefer to work out alone; and people who turn fitness into a social event. Fitocracy appeals to both kinds of people by giving you the opportunity to interact with other users. You can challenge them to duels and discuss your latest workout—or you can treat the site like a private activity log, challenging yourself to run farther and lift more without having to share your progress with anyone else. Variety is also a critical gamification ingredient, and Fitocracy injects variety by allowing you to adopt quests and challenges that draw on your favorite exercises. Wang and Talens have collected dozens of stories of people losing a hundred pounds with the site’s help—the majority having struggled to stick to an exercise regime for years.

Many adults fold in the face of temptation, so you can imagine how children struggle to do the right thing. Adults make wise decisions at least some of the time because they’re able to look into the distant future. Children, on the other hand, make decisions that suit them right now. There is no long view where children are concerned, so a chocolate cake is all temptation and no downside. But children love games as much as adults do, so gamification endows children with a dose of self-control. Take the case of dental hygiene. Kids have better things to do than brushing their teeth, particularly just before bedtime. Enter Philips Sonicare, which released a gamified toothbrush in August 2015. The toothbrush is designed to encourage kids to brush for a full two minutes. It has a small screen that displays a character called a Sparkly. Kids earn points for brushing each quadrant of teeth, and those points feed the Sparkly. The Sparkly proved so endearing that kids couldn’t get enough of the toothbrush. In an interview, a veteran at the company said, “Because kids love the game and they interacted so much with the app they didn’t go to bed right away.” The app had to be altered so the updated Sparkly falls over with exhaustion after brushing ends.

As NYU Game Center director Frank Lantz told me, designing games is tough. For every game that hooks the masses, thousands go largely unplayed. Philips had the opposite problem, deliberately tweaking the Sparkly app to make it *less* addictive. These tweaks are a common feature of gamified platforms, because it’s difficult to predict which elements will drive behavior. In 2009, Adam Bosworth, the former head of Google Health, launched a health app called Keas. At first, Keas was big on data and small on gamification. Bosworth designed the app to deliver mountains of feedback tailored to each user. Users completed quizzes and entered their workouts and meals, and Keas explained how their choices shaped important health outcomes. In Bosworth’s mind, users would exercise more and eat less if they were forced to confront the effects of laziness and gluttony. But idle data reports weren’t enough to change behavior, so Keas changed direction. Bosworth rolled out the app at a number of large corporations, where he encouraged employees to form rival teams. Good behavior earned players points, and the new version of Keas incorporated game levels and strategies. Bosworth wanted to make sure that the app had plenty of quizzes, so his team designed many more than he expected users to complete during the app’s standard twelve-day program. He undershot the mark: many users devoured the entire set in under a week.

Keas works in part because it’s simple. It relies heavily on a four-item quiz that users complete at the beginning and end of the twelve-day program. The questions are:

1. Are you a non-smoker?
2. Do you eat more than five servings of fruit and veggies a day?
3. Do you have a healthy bodyweight (Body Mass Index less than 25)?
4. Do you exercise regularly (more than 45 minutes, 5 times a week)?

For each “yes” answer, users earn a point—so scores of zero or one indicate an unhealthy lifestyle, while three or four indicate healthy behavior. Pfizer, the world’s largest pharmaceutical research firm, invested in the app several years ago. Before the program began, 35 percent of its workforce scored zero or one on the app—afterwards, that number fell to 17 percent. Meanwhile, healthy responses (scores of three or four) rose from 40 percent to 68 percent.

Keas operates for profit. Executives at companies like Pfizer pay a fee to use the program, and in turn their employees are healthier, more productive, less likely to call in sick and to draw from the company’s healthcare budget. Similar apps work just as well in not-for-profit contexts. An app called Health Lab improves the health of children in low-income communities, and the U.S. government has considered using games to fuel healthy childhood behavior across the country.

—

In the fall of 2009, a new school opened its doors in New York City. Quest to Learn (Q2L) welcomed seventy-six sixth graders in its first year, and then added one new class at the beginning of each new year. Q2L was the brainchild of several organizations that came together to design a new model of education. The old model, they reasoned, was far from perfect. For centuries, schools had been wrestling with kids who were distracted, unmotivated, and often unhappy in the classroom. School seemed to be unpleasant by design: a combination of rote learning and brute-force instruction. Fun was an afterthought, if anyone considered it at all, so most kids saw school as a chore.

Q2L is different. Like DDB for its Volkswagen campaign, the school was founded on fun. If kids enjoyed school, surely they’d be happier and more engaged. The school’s founders decided that the best way to inject fun was to make the learning experience one big game. Learning, it turns out, is ripe for gamification. Each new module of information can be structured like a game that begins at zero knowledge and ends at perfect comprehension. Q2L uses the same gamified structure for each larger learning module, or *mission*: students complete a series of smaller *quests* during the mission period (say, ten weeks), and then finish with a *boss level* that pushes them to apply what they’ve learned to a new context. The boss level concept draws on classic gaming theory: that players hone their skills by defeating easier opponents before tackling a formidable “boss.” The boss serves as a capstone—a signal that the player has completed the mission and can move on to the next one.

In one mission, “Dr. Smallz,” sixth or seventh graders learn about the human body. Dr. Smallz has shrunk himself to save an ailing patient, but alas, he has amnesia. The mission lasts thirteen weeks, and across its seven quests, students are charged with several goals: to help Dr. Smallz work out where he is in the patient’s body, remind him what each body organ and system does, help him solve the medical mystery of the patient’s illness, and, based on what they’ve learned about the body’s anatomy, help him find a way out of the patient’s body. By the end of the mission, students have learned the same scientific information that other schools teach, but for them the process is a game. In one task, for example, students build a cell from puzzle pieces. As they research information on each structure within the cell, they earn a piece, and so move closer to completing the task. In another, they learn about the immune system by playing a board game called Virus Attack. The game, designed by the Institute of Play, asks them to kill a virus by generating white blood cells, antibodies, and T-cells. Students earn rewards and track their progress just as they might do if they were playing a game outside the classroom.

A seventh-grade unit teaches students about the American Revolution. Their mission is to mediate a disagreement among several ghosts at the Natural History Museum. Each ghost represents a different Revolutionary character: a loyalist, a patriot, a landowner, a merchant, and a slave. They disagree about what happened during the Revolution, and the students must collect as much information as possible to prevent the bickering ghosts from destroying the museum’s entire collection. The students learn about the American Revolution, but they also learn that the truth is complex; that different parties may view the same event differently, and how to resolve those conflicts.

Q2L’s approach seems to be working. The school’s math team placed first in the New York City Math Olympiad three years in a row, and its students score roughly 50 percent higher than the average school on New York City’s standardized exams. By one metric, students grow intellectually between eighth and tenth grade as much as the average college student grows across all four years of college. Students and their teachers are also engaged: average student attendance sits at an impressive 94 percent, and the school has retained 90 percent of its teachers.

Gamified education sounds like an approach that might appeal most to children, but it works among young adults, too. In 2011, Rochester School of Technology’s School of Interactive Games and Media introduced a program called Just Press Play. The program motivates students by introducing voluntary quests. Each professor introduces these quests, and students have the option to pursue them or to ignore them. Many of the quests are designed for the entire cohort, rather than just for one or two students. For example, the “Undying” quest promises to give all students a reward if 90 percent of the first-year class passes its notoriously difficult introductory course. Historically the pass rate was lower than 90 percent, but the program was so appealing that several juniors and seniors showed up at the freshman computer lab to coach the freshmen through their course. Juniors and seniors weren’t eligible to benefit from the quest, but they were so impressed that they were moved to participate. Freshmen graduated at an unprecedented rate that year, and the juniors and seniors offered to help the next year as well. That’s the hallmark of a game that works: people are motivated intrinsically, even when they aren’t capable of earning extrinsic rewards. My favorite quest is promoted by Professor Andy Phelps himself, one of the program’s founders. Phelps’ quest is called “A Walk into Mordor,” named for a dark and dangerous region in J.R.R. Tolkien’s *Lord of the Rings.* “Find my office in the depths of Mordor, when the Black Gate is open,” Phelps says. “Get the card. Feel free to strike up a conversation . . .” Students don’t even realize they’re learning when they meet the professor—as far as they’re concerned, they’re just completing another quest.

—

From Andy Phelps’ quest to Q2L’s missions, gamification is designed to raise productivity where people would prefer to be lazy. In many contexts, laziness is the human default. Social psychologists Susan Fiske and Shelley Taylor describe humans as *cognitive misers* to suggest that we avoid thinking the way a miser avoids spending. Indeed, people prefer to think only as much as necessary to reach a just-acceptable conclusion. Miserliness makes sense from an evolutionary perspective, because thinking is costly. It stops an animal from acting, which leaves it vulnerable to predators and less prepared to seize limited opportunities. That’s why we rely so heavily on mental shortcuts, stereotypes, and rules of thumb, which allow us to make sense of a complex world as quickly as possible.

This laziness explains why work is dressed like a game. Salaries (*points*) rise with seniority (*levels*), which brings promotions and new titles (*badges*). The difference between most workplaces and genuine games is that people don’t go to work because they’re intrinsically motivated by the game; instead, the game is how the employer doles out the extrinsic rewards of money, prestige, and praise. As Nick Pelling explained when he coined the term, you’ll know you’re looking at gamification when the fun of playing the game becomes the reward. In some contexts, gamification can be dangerous. Exercise addicts tend to focus on the game of working out every day, or racking up a certain number of steps or miles. They forget that exercise is primarily designed to make them healthier, developing stress-related injuries instead in the quest for arbitrary fitness goals.

Beyond personal fitness devices, some companies gamify the workplace to motivate their employees. In 2000, four tech entrepreneurs formed a remote call center called LiveOps. LiveOps enlists more than twenty thousand everyday Americans to make telemarketing phone calls, and, more recently, to run the social media platforms of large organizations from Pizza Hut to Electronic Arts. The company vets agents before admitting them to its staff, and once accepted they can work as much or as little as they like in blocks of thirty minutes. All agents need are a landline phone, a computer, a high-speed Internet connection, and a corded headset. Some companies that use LiveOps pay by the minute—for example, twenty-five cents per minute spent on the phone—while others pay per call or per sale. LiveOps appeals to people without a fixed schedule—people who are employed part-time, at home with children, or between steady jobs.

The company’s flexibility is a strength, but call center workers without a fixed schedule tend to suffer dips in motivation. To combat those dips, LiveOps introduced a gamified dashboard. Each worker’s dashboard contains a progress bar with the percentage of calls that produce sales, trophies and badges for reaching certain sales milestones, and individual challenges tackled and accomplished. A leaderboard broadcasts the top salespeople across the company. According to LiveOps, these game elements improved service ratings by 10 percent, and lowered customer wait times by 15 percent. Sales conversion rates rose, and workers reported feeling more positive about working for the company.

Other organizations have grown by introducing gamified rewards. After Rodney Smith, Jr., noticed a ninety-three-year-old woman struggling to mow her lawn in Huntsville, Alabama, he created an organization known as Raising Men Lawn Care. Raising Men employs young men, many from underprivileged backgrounds, to mow lawns free of charge. (The organization is funded by well-wishers on its GoFundMe page.) The boys are motivated to do the right thing, but they’re also motivated by a badge system that borrows from martial arts. As the company’s Facebook page explains, the color-ranking system is “similar to how they do it in martial arts . . . the kids will start the program with a white shirt. Then when they do 10 lawns, they will get an orange shirt, when they do 20 lawns they will get a green shirt, 30 they will get a blue shirt, 40 a red shirt and 50 + lawns will get them a black shirt.” Raising Men’s success has spawned new chapters across the country, a growing online following, and tens of thousands of dollars in funding.

Gamification doesn’t help much when an experience is already fun; it does its best work when the experience is boring. On-the-job training is perhaps the most notoriously boring part of work. At the same time, training is critically important, because poorly trained workers are less productive and less safe. A number of companies are starting to train their employees with games. The Hilton Garden Inn, for example, hired the Virtual Heroes game design studio to develop a virtual training hotel. The game puts team members in a three-dimensional, virtual Hilton Garden Inn hotel, where they serve guests within a timed deadline. Their responses are graded for speed and appropriateness, which translate into Satisfaction and Loyalty Tracking (SALT) scores. The hotels assess employees with SALT scores in the real world, so the virtual game environment is an excellent simulation. Since Hilton’s success, Virtual Heroes has taken on a raft of large corporate clients, including the U.S. Army, the Discovery Channel, the Department of Homeland Security, BP, and Genentech.

These games aren’t just fun; they’re also engaging, and they improve job performance and retention. Traci Sitzmann, a management professor at the University of Colorado, studies the role of games in on-the-job training. In one sweeping study, she examined the results from sixty-five studies that compared game-based and offline training. Across nearly seven thousand trainees, she found that game-based training was far more effective than offline training: trainees who used video games had a 9 percent higher retention rate, remembered 11 percent more facts, and rated 14 percent higher on skill-based knowledge tests. Trainees also felt 20 percent more confident and capable after playing the games, since they relied on active, hands-on experience rather than passive instruction.

—

The same properties that make training engaging and palatable can also be harnessed for medical benefits. In 1996, a team of researchers at the University of Washington, in Seattle, received a government grant to study the effects of virtual reality gaming on pain tolerance. Burn victims are forced to endure awful pain on a daily basis, when their wounds are cleaned and their dressing replaced. In one study, 86 percent of all burn patients described their pain levels as “excruciating,” and this was *after* they were given morphine to treat the pain.

Some of the lab’s patients responded well to hypnosis, so the researchers designed a virtual-reality game called SnowWorld. A distraction like SnowWorld is critical because much of a patient’s pain comes from anticipation. As the researchers explain on their website:

Our logic for why virtual reality will reduce pain is as follows. Pain perception has a strong psychological component. The same incoming pain signal can be interpreted as painful or not, depending on what the patient is thinking. Pain requires conscious attention. The essence of VR is the illusion users have of going inside the computer-generated environment. Being drawn into another world drains a lot of attentional resources, leaving less attention available to process pain signals. Conscious attention is like a spotlight. Usually it is focused on the pain and wound care. We are luring that spotlight into the virtual world. Rather than having pain as the focus of their attention, for many patients in VR, the wound care becomes more of an annoyance, distracting them from their primary goal of exploring the virtual world.

SnowWorld is a first-person virtual reality adventure game. Players throw snowballs at penguins, mastodons, and snowmen while listening to upbeat songs by Paul Simon. The experience is immersive, and some burn patients describe playing the game as “fun”—a long way from the “excruciating” label they gave to the process of having their burns dressed before playing the game. When the researchers scanned patients’ brains, they found that pain regions were less active when the patients were playing SnowWorld than when they relied on morphine alone. The same process works for other painful experiences, too—the researchers have shown that it reduces dental pain, pain suffered by children as well as adults, and the psychiatric trauma of survivors of the World Trade Center attacks on September 11, 2001.

Though Tetris, which I first discussed in chapter 7, is wickedly addictive, it also shares some of SnowWorld’s therapeutic properties. Many people who witness death, injury, or a threat to others suffer ongoing trauma. The scenes they’re exposed to play on a loop, over and over, sometimes for the rest of their lives. Therapists have tools to treat post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), but those tools aren’t very effective immediately after the traumatic event. For a few weeks, the standard therapeutic approach doesn’t do much good, so survivors are generally forced to wait for treatment. This struck a team of psychiatrists at the University of Oxford as strange: why wait for the memories to crystallize before beginning treatment?

In 2009, the team, led by Emily Holmes, tested a novel PTSD intervention. They asked a group of adults to watch a twelve-minute video featuring “eleven clips of traumatic content including graphic real scenes of human surgery, fatal road traffic accidents and drowning.” This was their trauma simulation, and the participants who completed their study were indeed traumatized. Before the intervention they reported feeling calm and relaxed; afterward they were disturbed and jittery. Holmes and her team forced the adults to wait for thirty minutes—a simulation of the half hour wait a person might experience before being admitted to an emergency room. Then, half the participants played Tetris for ten minutes, while the other half sat quietly.

The adults went home for a week, and recorded their thoughts in a daily diary. Once a day they recounted the scenes from the video that replayed in their minds. Some saw cars colliding, and others remembered horrific scenes of human surgery. But the flashbacks affected some people more than others. Those who had sat quietly after watching the harrowing video experienced an average of six flashbacks during the week; those who had played Tetris experienced an average of fewer than three. Tetris, with its colors and music and rotating blocks, prevented the initial traumatic memories from solidifying. The game soaked up the mental attention that might have otherwise moved those horrific memories to long-term memory, and so they were stored imperfectly or not at all. At the end of the week, the adults returned to the lab, and those who had been lucky enough to play Tetris reported fewer psychiatric symptoms. The game had functioned as a “cognitive vaccine,” the researchers explained. Although the video had traumatized them in the short-term, Tetris had prevented it from traumatizing them in the long-term.

—

Gamification is widely celebrated, but it also has detractors. In 2013, a large team of researchers published a paper on games in *Nature*, one of the world’s premier science journals. The paper praised a game called NeuroRacer, which required players to steer a car while pushing buttons in response to on-screen prompts. This form of multitasking, the authors argued, was deeply therapeutic for older adults. Instead of declining, their mental functioning would remain sharp if they played NeuroRacer for an hour, three times a week. That isn’t much to ask in exchange for staving off mental decline. The authors asked almost two hundred adults to play the game for a month, and then measured their mental performance for six months. Compared to older adults who didn’t play at all, or who played a simpler version of the game, those who played the multitasking version did better on a wide battery of cognitive tests.

Several brain-training software companies emerged in the wake of this research. They earned billions of dollars in revenue promoting the idea that multitasking games would improve broader mental functioning. But the evidence was scattered. Some researchers replicated the *Nature* findings, but others argued that brain-training only improved performance on trivial games; it couldn’t actually improve people’s lives in the long run, years and decades beyond the scope of the original experiment. In 2014, seventy-five scientists signed a statement concluding “there is no compelling scientific evidence to date” that brain games can prevent cognitive decline. The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) seemed to agree. In January 2016, the FTC fined Lumos Labs, one of the largest and most successful brain-training companies, $2 million. According to the FTC, Lumos had engaged in “deceptive advertising” of its software. It was possible that Lumos’ games warded off cognitive decline, but the evidence was scant, and Lumos had overclaimed.

Even if gamification works, some critics believe it should be abandoned. Ian Bogost, a game designer at Georgia Tech, spearheads this movement. In 2011, he delivered a talk at a gamification symposium at Wharton. He titled his talk “Gamification Is Bullshit.” Bogost suggested that gamification “was invented by consultants as a means to capture the wild, coveted beast that is video games and to domesticate it.” Bogost criticized gamification because it undermined the “gamer’s” well-being. At best, it was indifferent to his well-being, pushing an agenda that he had little choice but to pursue. Such is the power of game design: a well-designed game fuels behavioral addiction.

Bogost demonstrated the power of gamification with a social media game called Cow Clicker. He designed Cow Clicker to mimic similar games, like FarmVille, which had dominated Facebook for many months. The game’s objective was simple: click your cow during critical periods and you’ll earn virtual currency known as *mooney.* Cow Clicker was supposed to satirize gamification, but it was a smash hit. Tens of thousands of users downloaded the game, and instead of playing once or twice, they played for days on end. At one point, a computer science professor sat atop the leaderboard with a hundred thousand mooney. Bogost updated the game with new features, adding awards for reaching certain milestones (such as the Golden Cowbell for one hundred thousand clicks), and introducing an oil-coated cow to commemorate the BP oil spill. He claimed that Cow Clicker’s success was a surprise, but really it embodied many of the traits that made other games addictive: Werbach and Hunter’s points, badges, and levels.

On one level, Cow Clicker is harmless fun. But Bogost makes an important point when he says that not everything should be a game. Take the case of a young child who prefers not to eat. One option is to turn eating into a game—to fly the food into his mouth like an airplane. That makes sense right now, maybe, but in the long run the child sees eating as a game. It takes on the properties of games: it must be fun and engaging and interesting, or else it isn’t worth doing. Instead of developing the motivation to eat because food is sustaining and nourishing, he learns that eating is a game.

In truth, it probably doesn’t matter much whether the child thinks of eating as a game or not. He’ll learn the purpose of eating soon enough. But just as he replaced eating’s true motive with fun, so gamification trivializes other experiences. The piano stairs at Odenplan are a lot of fun, but they don’t actually promote healthy behavior in the long run. Instead, they might undermine it by suggesting that working out should be fun, primarily, rather than designed to instill health and well-being. Cute gamified interventions like the piano stairs are charming, but they’re unlikely to change how people approach exercise tomorrow, next week, or next year.

In fact, the fun in gamification may crowd out important motives by changing how people see the experience entirely. In the late 1990s, economists Uri Gneezy and Aldo Rustichini tried to discourage parents from showing up late to collect their children from ten Israeli day care centers. The rational economic approach is to punish people when they’re doing the wrong thing, so some of the day care centers began fining parents who showed up late. At the end of each month, their day care bills reflected these fines—an attempt to dissuade them from showing up late the following month. In fact, the fines had the opposite effect. Parents at the day care centers with fines showed up late *more* often than did parents at the day care centers without fines. The problem, Gneezy and Rustichini explained, was that the fines crowded out the motive to do the right thing. Parents felt bad coming late—until coming late became a matter of money. Then, instead of feeling bad, they saw coming late as an economic decision. The intrinsic motive to do good—to show up on time—was crowded out by the extrinsic motive to show up late in exchange for a fair price. The same is true of gamification: people think about the experience differently as soon as it adopts the hallmarks of fun. Now exercising isn’t about being healthy; it’s about having fun. And as soon as the fun ends, so will the exercise.

—

Gamification is a powerful tool, and like all powerful tools it brings mixed blessings. On the one hand, it infuses mundane or unpleasant experiences with a measure of joy. It gives medical patients respite from pain, schoolkids relief from boredom, and gamers an excuse to donate to the needy. By merely raising the number of good outcomes in the world, gamification has value. It’s a worthwhile alternative to traditional medical care, education, and charitable giving because, in many respects, those approaches are tone-deaf to the drivers of human motivation. But Ian Bogost was also wise to illuminate the dangers of gamification. Games like FarmVille and Kim Kardashian’s Hollywood are designed to exploit human motivation for financial gain. They pit the wielder of gamification in opposition to the gamer, who becomes ensnared in the game’s irresistible net. But, as I mentioned early in this book, tech is not inherently good or bad. The same is true of gamification. Stripped of its faddish popularity and buzzwordy name, the heart of gamification is just an effective way to design experiences. Games just happen to do an excellent job of relieving pain, replacing boredom with joy, and merging fun with generosity.
